Hey guys, welcome back to the course. In this lecture,
we're going to get acquainted with what analytics tools
there are and how to decide which one is right
for your business. Analytics, for the uninitiated, just
refers to tracking and compiling the records
of how people interact on your site.
Do they buy something?
Do they read something?
Do they share it?
Do they clearly hate it and just leave?
These other things that we want to measure.
We're going to do a real quick sweep of the big three
analytics platforms worth knowing at this point.
Yes, I know, there are literally hundreds of analytics
platforms out there, but guess what, we're going
to focus on three.
The first one is Google Analytics, the second one
is Mixpanel, and the third one is Kissmetrics.
Now, chances are, if you've had any experience with
running a website or marketing campaign in the past,
you're probably familiar with Google Analytics. If analytics
platforms were bread, well, then Google Analytics
would be plain old whole wheat.
It's robust, it's good for you,
it signals that you're cheap, and no one
is really going to get excited about it.
It's not white bread, because white
bread is not bread, it's actually poison.
Google Analytics is somewhat the
bedrock of analytics platforms.
Estimates range that anywhere from 50% to 69%
of all websites using tracking tools are using Google
Analytics. Of the top 10,000 sites
on the whole of the intertubes,
65% of them use Google Analytics.
So I guess we're not the only cheapskates trying
to get away with using the only one that's free.
Now, what do you need to know
about good old Google Analytics?
Well, for starters, that it's the only
large platform that is mostly free.
The other two we cover actually charge upfront to
use their tools, whereas good old Google Analytics is
fine with you bumming off of it and
sleeping on its couch for a while.
That is, of course, until you need to add a lot of
collaborators, want some more advanced custom tracking,
at which point they charge you $150,000 a year.
Yes, some softwares go from free to $9,99 or free to $14.99,
Google goes from free to $150,000 a year.
Because of its simplified focus,
it's something I generally suggest for entry level work.
As in, if this is your first site or you only plan
to do basic tracking, then I say stick with Google
Analytics. In 90% of cases, you really won't need
fancy customized tracking, and even if you do,
well, you can often get away with tracking less at first
and then transitioning on to something more
fancy. And also, be honest, you wouldn't even know
what to do with all of that customized data anyway.
The second thing you need to understand about Google
Analytics is that it actually tracks users differently
than the other two platforms.
Now, the last thing I'll say about Google Analytics
is that it's by far the easiest to install of the three.
Now, like most standard analytics platforms, all
you have to do to install it is you take a snippet of
code and you just drop it on your site, pretty much
anywhere in the header tag, and that is really it.
If you want to track more pages, well, then you just
put that code on more pages. Whatever you want to
track, you stick the code on, and you're good.
This is the style that you'll see in some
of the simpler analytics platforms.
OK.
Now, the second analytics platform we'll chat
about is Mixpanel. Now, Mixpanel is not free.
Yes, I can hear the collective groan of all of you,
but it is more feature rich than Google Analytics,
and as a result some people just
like it better, myself included.
I personally like using Mixpanel
better because it's easier to use,
but I will admit it's quite a bit harder to set up.
Now, the biggest difference between Mixpanel and
Google Analytics is something that's probably going
to bore you to tears,
but hopefully if I say this in a really convincing tone
you'll somehow absorb it through the mental
coma you're currently in,
and then sometime later you'll be able to use this fact
to impress your friends, perhaps secure a mate.
Mixpanel tracks actions, whereas Google
Analytics tracks page views. Mind blown?
Yes. There is pandemonium in the
marketing community as a result of this.
Not really, but it is actually significant.
When you go to a website and you
load that page, that's called a page view.
You load that page and then Google Analytics tracks
that and says "Hey, this person loaded that page." What
you do after that, Google doesn't really particularly care
about. Whether you're loading that page on accident
on the way to porn pictures of puppies, or whether
you proceeded to click every button on site and spin
your mouse around for hours,
Google, like the honey badger, don't give a shit.
So that's a big advantage.
Check one in the pro column for Sir Mix-a-panel, because
what people do on your site is important beyond
what they just saw. On Mixpanel we can see if
they click this or scroll to what, or what they typed
into the form before abandoning.
Of course, that exact level of information comes with
a drawback. It's way more complicated to install and
you yourself are not going to probably be able to do it
correctly, unless you are proficient at programming.
You have to put JavaScript trackers that look for actions,
and the more action you want to track, then the longer
it's going to take to set them all up. With Mixpanel
and the last one we'll briefly discuss, Kissmetrics,
these platforms are better for people that are focusing
more on web applications and not just, say, web
stores or web info products. With apps, you care about
how long it takes people to do things on your site
and how they interact on each page.
These are things that you should be tracking. But with
an e-commerce store, on the other hand, what are
you really trying to track?
All right, let's round this off so that you can get
on with your life and the rest of the course.
Last one worth knowing is Kissmetrics.
If you haven't noticed, these three services are
kind of on a continuum in terms of effort to install
and feature ability.
Google Analytics is easy and doesn't track much, Mixpanel
is harder to use but tracks more, and Kissmetrics
tracks an enormous amount and is hell on earth to set up.
Just kidding,
but you will have to have a developer set this one up.
Kissmetrics works in a similar way to Mixpanel.
It tracks actions, but unlike the other two, it doesn't
just say anonymous user came to your site and
did this and did that.
It can actually track the anonymous user across
all of their devices and all of their visits,
so you can look instead of at an aggregate of what's happening,
at a long comprehensive story of each individual user.
On top of that, you can do A/B testing that's actually
built into the system. With the other ones, you'll actually
have to use a third party tool to do it efficiently,
probably something like Optimizely. If you're already
a data junkie and you really think having the
sharpest, most accurate, and most detailed
data will benefit you beyond the other two,
then it's something worth looking into.
For the vast majority of you though, Google Analytics
is really fine, and if you have something that operates
more like an app and you're trying to optimize user
behavior, as well as time on page and just regular
conversion and sales, well, then
Mixpanel is probably the way to go.
So speaketh me. See you in the next lecture.